In March, the government managed to lessen the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic in South Korea by adopting massive testing, data-intensive contact tracing, and promotion of social distancing. The government used cell phone location data, CCTV cameras, and tracking of debit, ATM, and credit cards to identify Covid-19 cases, and created a publicly available map for people to check whether they may have crossed paths with people with the virus. However, some of these measures infringed upon the right to privacy.

Health authorities sent out cell phone notifications to large numbers of people containing detailed information on confirmed Covid-19 cases, including age, gender, and places visited before being quarantined. The extensive personal information made public to assist in tracing also allowed people to identify infected persons, which led to public harassment and “doxing.”

In March, the National Human Rights Commission of Korea criticized authorities for these practices. In June and October, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention issued guidance not to publish patient age, sex, nationality, workplace, travel history, or home residency location, although some local governments still disclose some individual travel histories despite being directed against it. Concerns related to the collection and processing of sensitive personal information, which can reveal intimate information like a person’s sexual orientation and private relations, remained.

In 2020, over 6 million students enrolled in pre-school, primary, and secondary schools were impacted by school closures, according to United Nations estimates. The Ministry of Education minimized learning disruptions by relying on the country’s IT infrastructure and providers to deliver distance learning at scale and delayed the start of the school year by five weeks to minimize the loss of instruction time.

The public’s reaction to the Covid-19 pandemic at times stigmatized LGBT persons, foreigners, and members of some religious groups, laying bare deep-seated discriminatory attitudes.    
