President Moon Jae-in’s administration weakened the South Korean government’s criticism of North Korea’s human rights record. South Korea had co-sponsored annual resolutions at the UN condemning North Korea’s human rights abuses since 2008, but in December 2019 and December 2020 declined to do so at the UN General Assembly, and in 2019 and again in June 2020 declined to do so at the UN Human Rights Council.

In 2020, tensions between the South Korean government and human rights activists working on rights issues in North Korea sharpened significantly. On June 4, a few days after a human rights group sent 500,000 information leaflets into North Korea by balloon, Kim Yo Jong, the sister of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, issued a statement demanding that South Korea “make a law” to ban the sending of leaflets and made threats of retaliation. For decades, the government had allowed groups to send leaflets with messages, considering the acts allowable freedom of expression and signals of support to North Koreans. But hours after Kim’s statement, the South Korean government announced plans to prohibit leafleting, saying they can “raise tension in the border area.”

On June 11, the South Korean government announced that authorities had initiated processes to revoke the registration of two groups that regularly sent leaflets and food into North Korea by balloon or by plastic bottles put to sea. In July, the government canceled the operation permits of the two groups, and announced that the 25 groups working on North Korea human rights issues or assisting defectors, registered as businesses with the Unification Ministry, would have to undergo “office inspections.”

Authorities also sent notice of an administrative review of the registration status of 64 groups registered with the ministry as “non-profit private organizations” working in similar sectors. On July 22, a coalition of 25 organizations working on North Korean human rights and supporting North Koreans living in South Korea issued a joint statement rejecting office inspections. The coalition called the government’s actions discriminatory, lacking in transparency, and intended to provoke fear and self-censorship among the human rights community working on North Korea.
