BANGKOK -- Thai inflation is swelling as the end of a diesel subsidy has caused logistics costs to rise, adding more pressure to the cost of living that is weighing on the economy.

Producers of several products, ranging from instant noodles to sanitary products and construction materials, are boosting retail prices due to growing logistic costs after a government measure to cap the price of diesel at 30 baht per liter ended on May 1.

According to local media reports, instant noodle maker Thai President Foods is planning to raise retail prices from 6 baht (17 cents) to as high as 7 baht due to global price hikes.

"If oil prices continue to rise, inflation will rise in the same direction, and that will definitely hurt the Thai economy," said Kriangkrai Tiannukul, chairman of the Federation of Thai Industries.

Thailand's year-on-year inflation jumped to a 13-year-high of 5.73% in March and stayed at 4.71% in April, prompting the Commerce Ministry to increase the 2022 inflation target to 4% to 5% -- well above the forecast of 0.7% to 2.4%.

The private sector and analysts blamed the Russia-Ukraine war for the rise in oil prices that pushed the costs of items higher and added to pressure on Thailand's fragile economy.

As a net importer of oil, the depreciation of the baht is pushing energy prices even higher in Thailand, leading to a further rise in the cost of living. The currency hit a five-year low against the dollar in May.

While energy prices continue to soar, businesses asked for an extension of subsidies on diesel to keep prices below 35 baht per liter -- the level that many companies see as unacceptable.

"The government must not allow diesel prices to rise beyond 35 baht per liter, otherwise inflation will continue to rise and that would trigger another major problem such as rising household debt that will finally hurt the economy," said Anusorn Tamajai of Rangsit University.

Set up nearly half a century ago, the country's State Oil Fund has been used by the government to bring retail prices down for petroleum products. The fund currently racked up a 66 billion baht ($ 1.9 billion) deficit as of May due to the diesel subsidies amid surging global oil prices, making price caps more difficult for the government to sustain.

But analysts say that would eventually force the government to rely on state-owned banks to lend more money to allocate a portion of the annual budget for diesel subsidies.

The government previously cut the excise tax on diesel by 3 baht per liter, a move that is due to expire on May 20. But Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-ocha told a news conference on Tuesday that it will be extended by a cut of 5 baht per liter for two months.

The Thai Chamber of Commerce, the largest business lobby in Thailand, had asked for the extension. The government is deciding weekly on whether to increase the cap on diesel fuel to raise gradually by 1 baht until the consumer price reaches the ceiling of 35 baht per liter, after which the Energy Ministry will consider what to do.

"The 1 baht rise in diesel price for about one year could cut economic growth by 0.2%. That's why we urged the government to fix the price at below 35 baht per liter," said Sanan Angubolkul, chairman of the Thai Chamber of Commerce.

With spiraling oil prices and high inflation, the country's National Economic and Social Development Council on Tuesday cut its economic growth target to between 2.5% to 3.5%, down from the 3.5% to 4.5% that it forecast in February.
